“Divine Providence and Dominican Vocation:
Black and White in a World of Grey”
Fr. Romanus Cessario, O.P.
Dominican House of Studies / Washington, D.C.
Fall Vocation Weekend / 12 November 2016
1. A Reprise of 2014
Two years ago at one of these gatherings, I read a paper, “St. Thomas Aquinas and
Vocational Discernment,” which the Irish Dominicans subsequently published in their Religious
Life Review. Drawing on the theology of Saint Thomas Aquinas, I explained why the 1
contemporary practice of encouraging a man “to discern” a priestly vocation can misfire.
Aquinas and the commentators that both follow and interpret him prefer another mode by which
a young man discovers his vocation to consecrated life and the priesthood, one that puts priority
focus on the gift of divine grace that we call “a vocation.” Because Dominicans take Aquinas as
a theological guide, they accordingly direct a young man in whom interest in a priestly vocation
emerges to recognize the gift of divine grace that stands behind this awakening. Further, they
would encourage someone to embrace rather than “to discern” the grace to be a priest. To grasp
the truth of this Dominican point of view, each of you needs only to ask yourself why on a
perfectly pleasant Saturday evening you have come to the Dominican House of Studies to hear a
lecture about consecrated life and priesthood instead of doing what most other young men of
your age are doing tonight, even when such activity remains perfectly innocent. If you think that
1
 See Religious Life Review, vol. 54, no. 291 (2015), 69–84.
1
the answer to this question lies within yourself, your free will, your choice, then you need to
learn more about the interplay between divine grace and human freedom.
The ultimate explanation, in brief, for why you have come to a vocation weekend lies
with God. He drew you here, freely. True enough, you may find yourselves thinking about all of
the proximate motives and occasions that persuaded you to spend a weekend in DC. For
instance, “I had nothing better to do.” Or, “I know someone here, and he seems happy enough.”
Perhaps even, “I’m making a tour of all religious institutes in the United States that seem to have
a future.” These and any number of other reasons may have contributed to your choosing to
come to the House of Studies, but none of them fully explains the cause of your choice. In fact, a
gift of divine grace moved your freedom sweetly and firmly to pass over other possibilities, to
come to Washington, and to inquire about Dominican life. Nothing out of the ordinary occurs in
this premotion. That’s how God, the giver of all good gifts, works. Beyond the ordinary way in
which God sustains all human activity, your visiting the Dominicans results from a grace that
God gives to young men whom he also moves to receive it.
Even though much contemporary speech about vocations employs the word
“discernment,” the practice still remains fraught with difficulties. When people engage in
discernment, they do not necessarily ignore God. After all, they set about to discern God’s will in
order to obey it. However, absent very strict tutoring and apprenticeship in the right practice of
discernment, this exercise can easily turn inward the person who attempts it. In other words, the
one discerning starts to think more about himself than about God, to dwell more on his own
qualities and characteristics than on the divine grace and favor that comes from God, to agonize
2
over future hypothetical situations, e.g., can I survive a lifetime as a celibate, rather than to take
comfort in the supernatural support that God’s providential care always provides. To the extent
that these subjective, inward turning movements take hold of the man who undertakes “to
discern” a vocation to the priesthood, such a one grows distracted from the divine realities that
govern the world of men. The preoccupied discerner easily loses sight of the gift that God offers
him to merit his own salvation and to work instrumentally for the salvation of others. Put
otherwise, he sidesteps the grace of the moment. Since no natural analogue exists for the
Catholic priesthood (unlike marriage), Dominicans prefer to speak about the grace to be a priest,
not about discernment.2
One may inquire why the Church herself employs the word “discernment” to describe the
process whereby a layman finds his way into priestly formation. For example, Pope Saint John
Paul II’s Pastores dabo vobis employs some form of the word “discern” about thirty times.
However, by speaking about a Gospel discernment, this magisterial statement makes the point
clearly that Christ associates himself with the process of discernment from the very beginning.
“This Gospel discernment,” says the papal exhortation, “is based on trust in the love of Jesus
Christ, who always and tirelessly cares for his Church (cf. Eph. 5:29), he the Lord and Master,
the key, the center and the purpose of the whole of human history.” In other words, the Church 3
places discernment within the context of divine providence and its unique expression in Jesus
2
 For an excellent essay, read M. J. Nicolas, La grace d'être prêtre (Paris, 1986).
3
 Pope John Paul II, Pastores dabo vobis, no. 10.
3
Christ. By so doing, she points to a grandness that extends far beyond the personal questions and
introspections that a young man may entertain about whether God calls him to priesthood. I
concluded my 2014 presentation (which has been made available to you) by enumerating some
practical steps that a vocational prospect might take without his running the risk of
self–absorption in a misguided form of discernment.
Thanks to another invitation from Father Benedict Croell, I am now able to provide a
reprise of my 2014 talk on the grace to become a Dominican. Tonight, then, I wish to place a
vocation to the Dominican Order within the grandness of God’s plan for the salvation of the
world. Although in order to explicate fully a vocation to the Dominicans requires appeal to the
clerical state, what follows also applies to those who wish to embrace a vocation to the
Cooperator Brotherhood. Like the clerical candidate, the Dominican Brother finds his identity in
the image of Saint Dominic, who was a Catholic priest and whose mission in the Church remains
unintelligible apart from those saving actions that the Church commits to her priests. As the
name that the Order uses to designate a non–clerical brother suggests, Dominican Brothers
cooperate with the priests in the pursuit of the overall mission of the Order. The “Fundamental
Constitution” expresses this guiding purpose with great clarity:
Made cooperators of the episcopal order by priestly ordination, we have as our
special function the prophetic office by which the Gospel of Jesus Christ is
proclaimed everywhere both by word and example, with due consideration for the
conditions of persons, times, and places so that faith is awakened or penetrates
4
more deeply all life in the building up of the body of Christ, which is perfected by
the sacraments of faith.4
This description of the specific task that distinguishes Dominicans from other institutes of
consecrated life provides a summary of the place that the Order holds in the divine plan.
Dominicans did not invent themselves. They came into existence because of the special grace
that animated Dominic Guzman during a period when, in the Languedoc region of medieval
France, perverse ideologies had succeeded in corrupting the Catholic faith and causing great
spiritual and material harm to everyday people.
2. Divine Providence and the Dominican Life
One best understands the unique character of the Dominican vocation by a consideration
of the circumstances in which it arose. A convenient account of this history appears in a book,
Dominic, Or the Grace of the Word, by the late Dominican historian, Father Guy Bedouelle. We 5
learn that a young Spanish priest, Dominic Guzman, while traveling through southern France,
confronted Albigensian Catharism, a heretical sect with roots in the city of Albi. The medieval
chronicles report a paradigmatic event that signals God’s approbation of Saint Dominic’s efforts
to expose the errors of these Cathars, errors, moreover, that had succeeded in undermining both
4 LCO, “Fundamental Constitution,” no. 5.
5
 Guy Bedouelle, O.P., Dominic, or the Grace of the Word, trans. Sister Mary Thomas
Noble, O.P. (San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 1995). Citations in this text are taken from the new
French edition by Paul–Bernard Hodel (see below).
5
truthful preaching and true sacraments. The dramatic episode happened among the people of the
ancient Languedoc region of France whose capital was Toulouse. According to medieval
practice, those witnessing a debate between Saint Dominic and certain prominent Cathars sought
to test the veracity of each opposing side by appeal to the “judgement of God,” that is, a trial by
fire. So the bystanders started a bonfire and threw the books of each of the contending parties
into the flames. After three tries, Saint Dominic’s parchments emerged unscathed by the fire,
whereas those of the Cathars were burnt up immediately. From the start, Dominicans found 6
themselves separating black from white in a world of grey.
Another dispute between Cathars and Catholics in the spring of 1207 led to the
organization of “the Preaching of Jesus Christ,” the proto–model for the Dominican Order. This
exchange of theological arguments—dispute meant not so much quarrel as disputation—took
place in a small town of the French Midi called Montreal, near the walled city of Carcassonne
whose cathedral still shelters pillars that felt the brush of Saint Dominic’s black and white habit.
The Cathars advanced a sort of dualism in which spirit and matter warred against each other. To
take one example: Cathars considered the marriage bed sinful (because more fleshly creatures
emerged from it), whereas they encouraged suicide as a “sacrament,” since souls were liberated
from their prisons of flesh. Like with all deranged ideologies, the main spokespersons did not
always practice what they preached. What may we conclude from these founding events? That
6
 Guy–Thomas Bedouelle, Dominique, ou la grâce de la parole (Paris: Les Éditions du
Cerf, 2015), pp. 88, 89.
6
the Order of Saint Dominic was conceived as an ecclesial instrument for the defense of the faith,
to preach the truth of the faith continually (semper), against insidious agents bent on its
deformation. Note well that the disagreements in question should not be reduced to quibbles 7
over arcane details of dogmas. The Cathars put into jeopardy basic goods of the human person.
Today defense of the faith, especially as it was practiced in the thirteenth century, evokes
images that more likely provoke bewilderment than admiration. Popular culture and sometimes
purposeful mischief place Saint Dominic on the stage of the Inquisition. Besides, an inclusive
age shies away from projects that appear to distinguish people rather than to unite them. Our
period clearly prefers shades of grey to black and white. The medieval Church, it is true, both
combated and, through the agency of the civil government, punished those who departed
culpably and seriously from the truth of the Catholic religion. Political arrangements, however,
operate differently today. At the same time, the Church never abandons her defense of the
Catholic religion. Dominicans still acknowledge that their foundational purpose involves
providing a defense of Catholic truth. It would make no sense for a Dominican to take up a
prophetic office in the service of error. Holy Preaching follows upon Holy Teaching.
When it comes to confronting relativist moral positions and wrongly constituted inclusive
communities, Dominicans vigorously oppose secular propagandists. They prefer to remind
people, in the words of one Vatican document, that “the truth possesses in itself a unifying force.
It frees men from isolation and the oppositions in which they have been trapped by ignorance of
7
 Bedouelle, Dominique, p. 89.
7
the truth. And as it opens the way to God, it, at the same time, unites them to each other.” In 8
other words, adherence to the truth does not bring about division; adherence to the truth
constructs the only real form of unity that exists. Error, on the other hand, divides. The ultimate
explanation as to why Dominicans hold truth and unity together returns us to the One God who
measures the truth of all true things. For the preaching of Christian salvation, truth takes on a
new manifestation and a special urgency. Only revealed truth communicates what is required for
the salvation of the human race, what opens the way for every human being to enjoy beatific
communion with God.
Most visitors to a Dominican priory soon discover the motto of the Dominicans: “Truth.”
Veritas. Our commitment to both study and defend the Truth stems from the very first encounters
that Saint Dominic undertook and witnessed more than 800 years ago. It would be wrong to
imagine that Dominicans think of themselves as crusaders. It would be better to consider the
Order as a band of troubadours. The image requires an exercise of analogical thinking. Just as the
medieval lyric poets sang about courtly love, especially, as it happens, in the Provençal region of
France, so Dominicans use their gifts and talents to chant the marvels of divine love, of God’s
love for his creatures and creation. From the sources of divine revelation, scripture, tradition, and
Magisterium, Dominicans obtain “knowledge of salvation” (see Lk 1:77). However, this 9
8
 Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, Instruction Donum Veritatis, On the
Ecclesial Vocation of the Theologian, no. 3.
9
 See LCO, nos. 79, 80.
8
message of salvation needs preachers in order to translate and communicate the substance of
divine revelation and its significance for human lives. God arranged that the office of preaching
would remain linked to the hierarchical structure of the Church so that someone divinely
appointed would be responsible for oversight of the communication of the truth. Charismatic
preaching untethered to any authority than that of the person who speaks leads to disintegration.
Catholic preaching belongs first and foremost to Bishops. This explains why Dominicans are
described as “cooperators of the episcopal order.” The Church needs preachers of truth for a 10
very solid and unassailable reason. No one can discover God’s plan for salvation on his or her
own. Everything that the Church announces as belonging to the mystery of faith comes to her
from on high. Divine revelation requires heralds of truth. The message of Christ requires
troubadours. Men who will sing the providential mercies of the Lord forever. Men who fear
receiving a judgement like this: “because you are lukewarm, neither hot nor cold, I will spit you
out of my mouth” (Rev 4:16). Men who stand ready to distinguish black from white in a
lukewarm world that escapes easily into grey.
Much secular education limits inquiry to rational inquiry. Students nowadays learn about
religion as a product of history and culture. We all find ourselves looking at Catholic realities
through a sociological lens. Weblogs? Some think what transpires at 487 Michigan Avenue a fit
subject for scientific inquiry. No doubt the human sciences can throw light on the success of the
Province of Saint Joseph. For example, in a world where inclusiveness flattens out the
10 LCO, “Fundamental Constitution,” no. 5.
9
differences that make people interesting, men in white habits stand out for their individuality. In
a world where expediency governs every aspect of human life, Dominicans, who create leisure in
order to study truths with no cash value, draw notice. In a world where venereal pleasure drives a
considerable amount of human congress, young men vowed to chaste celibacy turn heads
because of their commitment. To avoid the infelicitous expression, counter–cultural, one may
opine that Dominican life occupies a prophetic place on the cultural map of the twenty–first
century. This place, however, does not appear strange to God. Dominican life fits nicely into the
plan of divine providence. In fact, only from the viewpoint of divine providence can we discover
why God raised up Dominicans.
God’s providence for his creatures expresses itself eminently in the Incarnation. The
values that Dominicans live reflect the life of the Savior himself. Christ comes among the human
race as a poor, chaste, and obedient man. Like the monk, the Dominican embodies these counsels
that one finds displayed throughout the New Testament. Why do we call the evangelical counsels
a sign of God’s providence for the world? The answer is simple: each counsel provides a remedy
for the most hurtful results of original sin. Poverty. Although Saint Francis of Assisi captured the
title of “Il Poverello,” Saint Dominic showed the same love of poverty as did his Italian
contemporary. In fact, Saint Dominic was obliged to counter the Albigensian propaganda
whereby they appealed to the poverty of the Apostles as a proof of their authenticity. The
Cathars made a show of appearing poor. Dominic always wore shoes in public to demonstrate
that going shoeless does not entitle people to create myths. Chastity. The Cathars abused chastity
by preaching it as a control on what they considered the negative features of sexual intercourse,
10
such as children. Saint Dominic, who before his arrival in France lived consecrated chastity,
taught the positive features of chastity. In a word, the chaste man prays and studies better than
does the unchaste man. Celibate chastity also liberates the Dominican preacher from the
obligations that marriage entails so that he can move about freely as the needs of the apostolate
require. Obedience. The Cathars developed their own hierarchy and their own chain of
command—every indication makes of the Albigensians a sectarian control movement. Saint
Dominic showed that obedience provides the premier way to imitate the powerless Christ who
was obedient even unto death on a cross (see Phil 2:8). To counter sectarian impulses, Dominic
Guzman also taught that obedience binds Catholics everywhere to the See of Peter as a principle
of worldwide unity. Obedience affords the first line of defense against fragmentation. These
lifestyle choices configure the Dominican to the Person of Jesus Christ. As a follower of Saint
Dominic, the configured Dominican places himself at the disposal of the Holy Preaching, the
Pradicatio Iesu Christi.
To complete this picture of the place that the Dominicans hold in God’s providential plan
for the salvation of the world, consider another text from the “Fundamental Constitution.” The
paragraph deals with the means to achieve the Order’s objectives.
We also undertake as sharers of the apostolic mission the life of the Apostles in
the form conceived by St. Dominic, living with one mind the common life,
faithful in the profession of the evangelical counsels, fervent in the common
11
celebration of the liturgy, especially of the Eucharist and the divine office as well
as other prayer, assiduous in study, and persevering in regular observance.11
Prayer, especially formal liturgical prayer, study, and a regular form of life completes the picture
of how a Dominican lives out his providential vocation. Prayer, especially the Liturgy of the
Hours and the Holy Mass, of course complement the fundamental commitment that a Dominican
makes to the worship of God. In fact, one Dominican author has spoken about religious life in
general as a living liturgy. Since one of the effects of original sin leaves the intellect of man 12
darkened, the remedy of study becomes a means of sanctification. Study provides an approach to
the mysteries of the Christian religion that no other manner of entry can replace. The mystic may
find inexpressible delight in the mystery of the Cross, but only the theologian can set down a
coherent, though necessarily incomplete, explanation as to why Christ had to suffer on a cross.
Regular observance points to those practices that ensure that the form of Dominican life achieves
its actualization in a way that allows many to share a common dwelling. The observances prove
effective means for placing checks on the remnants of concupiscence that leave no descendent of
Adam untouched—Our Lady being the sole exception.
Dominican consecration should not be viewed as a functional expediency that makes
Dominicans leaner and meaner agents of evangelization. The vows, made to God, and everything
11 “Fundamental Constitution,” no. 4.
12 Paul G. Hinnebusch, O.P. Religious Life, A Living Liturgy (New York: Sheed & Ward,
1965).
12
else that Dominicans characteristically do, express worship. The vows put everything
Dominicans take up under the virtue of religion. This theological point warrants due
consideration. The worship of God does not qualify as an optional exercise of piety for the
especially devout. Worship describes a first response of human persons as soon as they realize
that everything that they possess comes from God. So parents teach their children to pray. In
other words, rational creatures owe God worship. To fail to worship offends against the
creaturely status of any human being. So the Church recognizes consecrated life as a legitimate
expression of baptismal commitment. Dominicans daily aim to fulfill Christ’s words to the
Samaritan Woman: “But the hour is coming, and is now here, when true worshipers will worship
the Father in Spirit and truth; and indeed the Father seeks such people to worship him” (Jn 4:
23).
The “Fundamental Constitution” completes its account of Dominican life by explaining
how its various elements contribute to the Order’s realizing her purpose.
All these practices contribute not only to the glory of God and our sanctification,
but serve directly the salvation of mankind, since they prepare harmoniously for
preaching, furnish its incentive, form its character, and in turn are influenced by
it. These elements are closely interconnected and carefully balanced, mutually
enriching one another, so that in their synthesis the proper life of the Order is
13
established: a life in the fullest sense apostolic, in which preaching and teaching
must proceed from an abundance of contemplation.13
It is a remarkable thing to learn that the Dominican charism developed out of the providential
encounter between a traveling Spanish priest and a confused innkeeper. The story recounts that
Saint Dominic stayed up all night talking with a layman intrigued by the Albigensian mythology,
with the result that by daybreak, the innkeeper had returned to the Catholic fold. Today this 14
anonymous thirteenth–century innkeeper represents for Dominicans the world of the new
evangelization. The incident illumines how the Dominican vocation serves the designs of divine
providence.
3. Providence and Personal Choice
Although contemporary outlooks emphasize the idiosyncratic nature of choosing,
Christians recognize that their choices must conform to the divine norm for all choosing. In his
encyclical on moral theology, Veritatis splendor, Pope Saint John Paul II described Christian
choosing as a theonomy, that is, as an action in which God and the human agent each fully acts.
The Pope explains how philosophers describe this view of human freedom: “Others speak, and
rightly so,” says the Pope, “of theonomy, or participated theonomy, since man’s free obedience
to God’s law effectively implies that human reason and human will participate in God’s wisdom
13 “Fundamental Constitution,” no. 4.
14 Bedouelle, Dominique, pp. 83, 84.
14
and providence.” Theonomy affords the Catholic and Dominican alternative to conceptions 15
about human choosing that make of Christian life an agonizing affair. The fullest expression of
moral agony appears in heteronomy. What does this false view of Christian living look like?
“Obedience to God,” explains the Pope, “is not, as some would believe, a heteronomy, as if the
moral life were subject to the will of something all–powerful, absolute, extraneous to man and
intolerant of his freedom.” Nietzsche not Saint Paul made Christian life a heteronomy. 16
The dominant motif of today’s culture appears in the cry for moral autonomy. The Pope
points out that this view, which finds many exponents in Western philosophy, especially since
the seventeenth century, adversely affects Catholic living. He says: “These doctrines [that
promote autonomy] would grant to individuals or social groups the right to determine what is
good or evil. Human freedom would thus be able to ‘create values’ and would enjoy a primacy
over truth, to the point that truth itself would be considered a creation of freedom. Freedom
would thus lay claim to a moral autonomy which would actually amount to an absolute
sovereignty.” In short, Veritatis splendor sets down a taxonomy of modern views of freedom. 17
The right way to approach the choosing of a Dominican vocation proceeds neither as an act of
autonomous willing nor of heteronomous imposition. Since, as Veritatis splendor underscores,
“human reason and human will participate in God’s wisdom and providence,” the one seeking to
15 Veritatis splendor, no. 41.
16 Veritatis splendor, no. 41.
17 Veritatis splendor, no. 35.
15
enter the Dominicans should view his choice within the larger picture of God’s providential
governance of the world. The aspirant must act theonomously. 18
Not every man can become a Dominican priest. In fact, according to the divine
command, “be fruitful and multiply,” spoken to Adam—the first divine command given to the
human race—the burden of keeping the human race alive falls equally on the shoulders of all
men and women. One hardly needs to observe that this divine command and its normative
character for heterosexual intercourse threatens some contemporary social movements. The
Church, however, sees “in transmitting the gift of human life: ‘God blessed them, and God said
to them, ‘be fruitful and multiply, and fill the earth and subdue it’ (Gen 1:27)” a blessing not a
burden for the human race. In any event, we cannot replicate the Cathars’ mistake and suggest 19
that everyone should abstain from legitimate sexual intercourse. At the same time, only Christ
and his way of life justify the choice of chaste celibacy by that man chosen to imitate him.
The choice to forego natural paternity frees a man to take on a spiritual paternity. No
intermediate position exists. The Church does not bless eunuchs. Still, those born of woman
require pastoral care. Spiritual fatherhood returns us to the theme of divine providence and the
Dominican vocation. One sees the analogy easily: Just as the human seed remains indispensable
for conceiving a child, so the seed of the Word of God remains indispensable for making saints.
The choice to take on the black and white in a world of grey does not enroll a young man in a
18 Veritatis splendor, no. 41.
19 Familiaris consortio, no. 28.
16
militia dedicated exclusively to chasing down erroneous opinions and theories. The providential
choice to seek admission to the Dominican Order challenges one to prepare for spiritual
fatherhood. Think of Saint Dominic and the Albigensian innkeeper. There you see an example of
Dominican accompaniment, a patient, presumably loving, and artful engagement with the truth
—it is reported that Saint Dominic began by complementing his tavern fare. If the thought of
being a troubadour of truth exhilarates you, then embrace the grace and run with it.
OPEast.org/Vocations
DominicanFriars.org
DHS.edu
17
